One of the reasons that computers are so
useful is that they can repeat an
operation multiple times, very quickly.
That removes the need for a human to
perform a repetitive task. Python
provides several ways to repeat a block
of code, things like for loops, while
loops and list comprehensions and
generator expressions. In the next few
videos we'll look at for loops.
We'll cover while loops after that but
we'll be leaving list comprehensions and
generator expressions for a later
section. We've actually seen a for loop
in earlier examples, and now it's time to
look at them in more detail and explain
what was happening in that code. A for
loop works by iterating over some set of
values. It assigns each of the values, one
by one, to one or more variables.
It then executes a block of code once for each
value. The set of values comes from a
sequence or some other iterable object.
We've seen one sequence type, the string
type. I'll use that for our first examples.
An iterable type is anything that can
be iterated over. So that means a
sequence is also an iterable. In simple
terms, if you can use it with a for loop,
then its iterable. And I'll be
introducing one iterable type - the range -
in some of the following examples.
Alright, so back to Intellij and what we're going
to do here is create a new file, and we'll call this forloops.py.
Alright, so we'll use the parrot string from an earlier video.
So parrot is equal to "Norwegian Blue".
So you saw how to use in to check if any particular
letter is in the sequence. In also has another use
when used with a for loop. So let's see
how that works, so we're going to type for
character in parrot:
print (character)
So a for loop starts with the keyword for.
Next we provide the names of one or more
variables. We'll stick to using a single
variable at first because
using more than one won't make much
sense just yet. In this example, we've
called the variable, character. You can
call the variable anything you want,
within the rules for variable names, of
course. Variable names can't start with a
digit, for example. Next we have the
keyword, in. Our variable character will
be bound to each of the items in the
sequence, in turn. Finally we specify what
the values are in. We're using the parrot
variable here but we could use any
iterable object. What should happen is
that the variable character gets each of
the characters in the string. On line
4 we're printing out the value of
character, so let's run the program and
see if it does what we expect it to do.
And that looks right, so if I scroll the
output there, you can see each letter of
the string is output on a separate line,
and I'm just going to increase this just
so we can see a bit more of it. You can't
quite see at all without actually
scrolling all the source code off
the screen but it's enough of it anyway.
So that output's probably not very useful
but it does demonstrate what our for
loop is actually doing. Students often
find this confusing, especially if
they've never programmed before. Even
students who've used other languages can
be a bit confused because the for loop
in Python behaves differently to C or
Java. So let's set a breakpoint on line
3 and run the program in the
debugger to see what's happening.
So you can see now that I've chosen debug for loops,
the debugger stopped on line 3,
where we set the breakpoint. In the
variables pane we can see the value of
parrot. It's bound to the string
Norwegian Blue. If we use step over,
you can see having done that,
the variables pane's now showing the value of character.
It's been given the first character in Norwegian Blue,
so it's bound to the capital letter N. When we
step over again, execution has going back
to line 3, as you can see there,
and the print on line 4 has been executed.
If I switch to the console pane, you can see
we've got the first letter there, N.
Alright, so if I step over again now,
we can see that line 3 is executed again.
Now we haven't yet printed again so
there's no change to the console pane, but
if I switch back to the debugger pane now,
you can see that character now
has the value o, the next character from
Norwegian Blue. So a for loop executes
all the code in its code block
repeatedly. It loops around until there's
no more values, in other words.
We're ready to execute the print line again so
I'm going to step over, and I won't keep
switching between the debugger and
console panes. That I'll just get
confusing, but if you do you'll see that
the letter o has now been printed and we're
now back on line 3. Step over again,
which I did to execute the line once
more and now character has the value r.
So each time we get back to line 3
and execute it, character gets the next
letter from the parrot string, and that's
why I called the variable character, by
the way. It's been assigned each of the
characters in the string, one after the
other. There's nothing special about that
name - it just reflects the values that
our code will assign to it. Alright, so
I'm going to continue stepping over the
code and you'll see each letter being
assigned to our character variable,
each time around the loop.
And you can see finally now, we've hit
the last letter e. If we step over once
more now. It's now executed the print.
If we have a look on the console, we can see
we've got the entire line there,
Norwegian Blue, and back to the debugger.
One more time, I'll press step over. This
time you can see what's happened. It's
caused the for loop to terminate because
there's nothing left for it to do,
and again, you just saw that when I tapped
over to the console pane; all letters had
been printed out. Alright, so I'll stop
the video here. Run the code a few more
times in the debugger to make sure you
understand what's happening here.
When you're happy with this basic for loop,
I'll see you in the next video.